.TH MHTML 7
.SH NAME
mhtml \- macros for formatting HTML
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B pic
.B |
.B tbl
.B |
.B eqn
.B |
.B htmlroff
[
.B -man
|
.B -ms
]
.B -mhtml
.I file
\&...
.SH DESCRIPTION
This package of
.MR htmlroff (1)
macro definitions provides convenient macros for formatting HTML.
It is usually used along with 
.MR troff (1)
macro packages such as
.MR man (7)
and
.MR ms (7) .
.I Mhtml
replaces some macros defined in the other packages,
so it should be listed after them on the
.I htmlroff 
command line.
.PP
The following macros are defined:
.TP
.B .HTML \fItitle
Print an HTML header marking the output as 
HTML 4.01 loose transitional encoded in UTF.
If given, the
.I title
is printed inside
.B <title>
tags.
This macro opens the
.B <html>
tag, opens and closes the
.B <head>
section, and opens
.B <body> .
It invokes the
.B .HEAD
macro inside the
.B <head>
section.
To add arbitrary lines to the header,
append to
.B .HEAD
before invoking
.BR .HTML .
.TP
.B .FS\fR, \fP.FE
Accumulate footnotes and print them at the end of the
document under a \fBNotes\fP heading.
These replace the macros in
.MR ms (7) .
To emit the notes accumulated so far, invoke
.BR .NOTES .
.TP
.B .PS\fR, \fP.PE
Replace input bracketed
.B .PS
and
.B .PE
with a PNG image corresponding to the output of
running
.MR troff (1)
on the input.
.TP
.B .TS\fR, \fP.TE
Identical to
.B .PS
and
.BR .PE .
.TP
.B .B1 \fImargin\fP \fIwidth\fR, \fL.B2
Format the input between
.B .B1
and
.B .B2
inside a box, with
.I margin
(default 10)
pixels between the box and the text.
The box is set to be
.I width
(default 60)
percent of the current output width.
.SH FILES
.B \*9/tmac/tmac.html
.SH  SEE ALSO
.MR htmlroff (1) ,
.MR htmlroff (7) ,
.MR ms (7)
