.TH MPICTURES 7
.SH NAME
mpictures \- picture inclusion macros
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B troff -mpictures
[
.I options
]
.I file ...
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Mpictures
macros insert PostScript pictures into
.MR troff (1)
documents.
The macros are:
.TP
.BI .BP " source height width position offset flags label
Define a frame and place a picture in it.
Null arguments, represented by \f5""\fR,
are interpreted as defaults.
The arguments are:
.RS
.TP
.I source
Name of a PostScript picture file, optionally
suffixed with
.RI ( n )
to select page number
.I n
from the file (first page by default).
.PD0
.TP
.I height
Vertical size of the frame, default
.BR 3.0i .
.TP
.I width
Horizontal size of the frame, current line length by default.
.TP
.I position
.L l
(default),
.LR c ,
or
.L r
to left-justify, center, or right-justify the frame.
.TP
.I offset
Move the frame horizontally from the original
.I position
by this amount, default
.BR 0i .
.TP
.I flags
One or more of:
.RS
.PD 0v
.TP
.BI a d 
Rotate the picture clockwise
.I d
degrees, default 
.IR d =90.
.TP
.B o
Outline the picture with a box.
.TP
.B s
Freely scale both picture dimensions.
.TP
.B w
White out the area to be occupied by the picture.
.TP
.BR l , r , t ,\fPb
Attach the picture to the left right, top, or bottom of the frame.
.RE
.TP
.I label
Place
.I label
at distance
.B 1.5v
below the frame.
.PD
.PP
If there's room,
.B .BP
fills text around the frame.
Everything destined for either side of the frame
goes into a diversion to be retrieved when the accumulated
text sweeps past the trap set by 
.B .BP
or when the diversion is explicitly closed
by 
.BR .EP .
.RE
.TP
.BI .PI " source height" , width , "yoffset\fB,\fPxoffset flags.
This low-level macro, used by
.BR .BP ,
can help do more complex things.
The two arguments not already described are:
.RS
.TP
.I xoffset
Offset the frame from the left margin by this amount, default
.BR 0i .
.PD0
.TP
.I yoffset
Offset the frame from the current baseline,
measuring positive downward, default
.BR 0i .
.PD
.RE
.TP
.B .EP
End a picture started by
.BR .BP ;
.B .EP
is usually called implicitly by a trap
at frame bottom.
.PP
If a PostScript file lacks page-delimiting comments,
the entire file is included.
If no
.B %%BoundingBox
comment is present, the picture is
assumed to fill an 8.5\(mu11-inch page.
Nothing prevents the picture from being placed off the page.
.SH SEE ALSO
.MR troff (1)
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
A picture file that can't be read by the PostScript
postprocessor is replaced by white space.
.SH BUGS
A picture and associated text silently disappear if
a diversion trap set by
.B .BP
isn't reached.
Call
.B .EP
at the end of the document to retrieve it.
.PP
Macros in other packages may break the adjustments
made to the line length and indent when text is being placed
around a picture.
.PP
A missing or improper
.B %%BoundingBox
comment may cause the frame to be filled incorrectly.
