.TH MS 7
.hc %
.SH NAME
ms \- macros for formatting manuscripts
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B "nroff -ms"
[
.I options
]
.I file ...
.br
.B "troff -ms"
[
.I options
]
.I file ...
.SH DESCRIPTION
This package of
.I nroff
and
.MR troff (1)
macro definitions provides a canned formatting
facility for tech%nical papers in various formats.
.PP
The macro requests are defined below.
Many
.I nroff
and
.I troff
requests are unsafe in conjunction with
this package, but the following requests may be used with
impunity after the first
.BR .PP :
.LR .bp ,
.LR .br ,
.LR .sp ,
.LR .ls ,
.LR .na .
.PP
Output of the
.MR eqn (1) ,
.MR tbl (1) ,
.MR pic (1)
and
.MR grap (1)
preprocessors
for equations, tables, pictures, and graphs is acceptable as input.
.SH FILES
.B \*9/tmac/tmac.s
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.br
M. E. Lesk,
``Typing Documents on the UNIX System: Using the \-ms Macros with Troff and Nroff'',
.I
Unix Research System Programmer's Manual,
Tenth Edition, Volume 2.
.br
.IR eqn (1), 
.IR troff (1), 
.MR tbl (1) ,
.MR pic (1)
.SH REQUESTS
.ta \w'..ND \fIdate\fR 'u +\w'Initial 'u +\w'Cause 'u
.br
.di x
			\ka
.br
.di
.in \nau
.ti0
Request	Initial	Cause	Explanation
.ti0
	Value	Break
.br
.in \nau
.ti0
\fL\&.1C\fP	yes	yes	One column format on a new page.
.ti0
\fL\&.2C\fP	no	yes	Two column format.
.ti0
\fL\&.AB\fP	no	yes	Begin abstract.
.ti0
\fL\&.AE\fP	-	yes	End abstract.
.ti0
\fL\&.AI\fP	no	yes	Author's institution follows.
Suppressed in
.BR .TM .
.ti0
\fL\&.AT\fP	no	yes	Print `Attached' and turn off line filling.
.ti0
\fL\&.AU\fP\fP\fP \fIx y\fR	no	yes	Author's name follows.
.IR x " is location and " y " is"
extension, ignored except in
.BR TM .
.ti0
\fL\&.B\fP \fIx y\fR	no	no	Print
.I x
in boldface, append
.IR y ;
if no argument switch to boldface.
.ti0
\fL\&.B1\fP	no	yes	Begin text to be enclosed in a box.
.ti0
\fL\&.B2\fP	no	yes	End boxed text.
.ti0
\fL\&.BI\fP \fIx y\fR	no	no	Print
.I x
in bold italic and append
.IR y ;
if no argument switch to bold italic.
.ti0
\fL\&.BT\fP	date	no	Bottom title, automatically invoked at
foot of page.
May be redefined.
.ti0
\fL\&.BX\fP \fIx\fR	no	no	Print
.I x
in a box.
.ti0
\fL\&.CW\fP \fIx y\fR	no	no	Constant width font for
.IR x ,
append
.IR y ;
if no argument switch to constant width.
.ti0
\fL\&.CT\fP	no	yes	Print `Copies to' and turn off line filling.
.ti0
\fL\&.DA\fP \fIx\fR	nroff	no	`Date line' at bottom of page
is
.IR x .
Default is today.
.ti0
\fL\&.DE\fP	-	yes	End displayed text.
Implies
.BR .KE .
.ti0
\fL\&.DS\fP \fIx\fR	no	yes	Start of displayed text,
to appear verbatim line-by-line:
.L I
indented (default),
.L L
left-justified,
.L C
centered,
.L B
(block) centered with straight left margin.
Implies
.BR .KS .
.ti0
\fL\&.EG\fP	no	-	Print document in BTL format for `Engineer's Notes.'  Must be first.
.ti0
\fL\&.EN\fP	-	yes	Space after equation
produced by
.I neqn
or
.MR eqn (1) .
.ti0
\fL\&.EQ\fP \fIx y\fR	-	yes	Display equation.
Equation number is
.IR y .
Optional 
.I x
is
.BR I ", " L ", " C
as in
.BR .DS .
.ti0
\fL\&.FE\fP	-	yes	End footnote.
.ti0
\fL\&.FP\fP \fIx\fR	-	no	Set font positions for a family, e.g.,
.L .FP luxisans
.ti0
\fL\&.FS\fP	no	no	Start footnote.
The note will be moved to the bottom of the page.
.ti0
\fL\&.HO\fP	-	no	`Bell Laboratories, Holmdel,
New Jersey 07733'.
.ti0
\fL\&.I\fP \fIx y\fR	no	no	Italicize
.IR x ,
append
.IR y ;
if no argument switch to italic.
.ti0
\fL\&.IH\fP	no	no	`Bell Laboratories, Naperville, Illinois 60540'
.ti0
\fL\&.IM\fP	no	no	Print document in BTL format for an internal memorandum.  Must be first.
.ti0
\fL\&.IP\fP \fIx y\fR	no	yes	Start indented paragraph,
with hanging tag
.IR x .
Indentation is
.I y
ens (default 5).
.ti0
\fL\&.KE\fP	-	yes	End keep.
Put kept text on next page if not enough room.
.ti0
\fL\&.KF\fP	no	yes	Start floating keep.
If the kept text must be moved to the next page,
float later text back to this page.
.ti0
\fL\&.KS\fP	no	yes	Start keeping following text.
.ti0
\fL\&.LG\fP	no	no	Make letters larger.
.ti0
\fL\&.LP\fP	yes	yes	Start left-blocked paragraph.
.ti0
\fL\&.LT\fP	no	yes	Start a letter; a non-empty first argument
produces a full Lucent letterhead, a second argument is a room number,
a third argument is a telephone number.
.ti0
\fL\&.MF\fP	-	-	Print document in BTL format for `Memorandum for File.'  Must be first.
.ti0
\fL\&.MH\fP	-	no	`Bell Laboratories, Murray Hill,
New Jersey 07974'.
.ti0
\fL\&.MR\fP	-	-	Print document in BTL format for `Memorandum for Record.'  Must be first.
.ti0
\fL\&.ND\fP \fIdate\fR	troff	no	Use date supplied (if any) only in
special BTL format positions; omit from page footer.
.ti0
\fL\&.NH\fP \fIn\fR	-	yes	Same as
.BR .SH ,
with automatic section
numbers  like `1.2.3';
.I n
is subsection level (default 1).
.ti0
\fL\&.NL\fP	yes	no	Make letters normal size.
.ti0
\fL\&.P1\fP	-	yes	Begin program display in constant width font.
.ti0
\fL\&.P2\fP	-	yes	End program display.
.ti0
\fL\&.PE\fP	-	yes	End picture; see
.MR pic (1) .
.ti0
\fL\&.PF\fP	-	yes	End picture; restore vertical
position.
.ti0
\fL\&.PP\fP	no	yes	Begin paragraph.
First line indented.
.ti0
\fL\&.PS\fP \fIh w\fR	-	yes	Start picture; height
and width in inches.
.ti0
\fL\&.PY\fP	-	no	`Bell Laboratories, Piscataway, New Jersey 08854'
.ti0
\fL\&.QE\fP	-	yes	End quoted material.
.ti0
\fL\&.QP\fP	-	yes	Begin quoted paragraph (indent both margins).
.ti0
\fL\&.QS\fP	-	yes	Begin quoted material (indent both margins).
.ti0
\fL\&.R\fP	yes	no	Roman text follows.
.ti0
\fL\&.RE\fP	-	yes	End relative indent level.
.ti0
\fL\&.RP\fP	no	-	Cover sheet and first page for released
paper.
Must precede other requests.
.ti0
\fL\&.RS\fP	-	yes	Start level of relative indentation
from which subsequent indentation is measured.
.ti0
\fL\&.SG\fP \fIx\fR	no	yes	Insert signature(s) of author(s),
ignored except in 
.B .TM
and
.BR .LT .
.IR x " is the reference line (initials of author and typist)."
.ti0
\fL\&.SH\fP	-	yes	Section head follows,
font automatically bold.
.ti0
\fL\&.SM\fP	no	no	Make letters smaller.
.ti0
\fL\&.TA\fP\ \fIx\fR...	5...	no	Set tabs in ens.
Default is 5 10 15 ...
.ti0
\fL\&.TE\fP	-	yes	End table; see
.MR tbl (1) .
.ti0
\fL\&.TH\fP	-	yes	End heading section of table.
.ti0
\fL\&.TL\fP	no	yes	Title follows.
.ti0
\fL\&.TM\fP\ \fIx\fR...	no	-	Print document in BTL technical memorandum format.
Arguments are TM number, (quoted list of) case number(s), and file number.
Must precede other requests.
.ti0
\fL\&.TR\fP \fIx\fR	-	-	Print in BTL technical report format; report number is \fIx\fR.  Must be first.
.ti0
\fL\&.TS\fP \fIx\fR	-	yes	Begin table; if
.I x
is
.B H
table heading is repeated on new pages.
.ti0
\fL\&.UL\fP \fIx\fR	-	no	Underline argument (even in troff).
.ti0
\fL\&.UX\fP\ \fIy z\fP	-	no	`\fIz\fRUNIX\fIy\fP';
first use gives registered trademark notice.
.ti0
\fL\&.WH\fP	-	no	`Bell Laboratories, Whippany,
New Jersey 07981'.
.hc
