.TH FONTSRV 4
.SH NAME
fontsrv \- file system access to host fonts
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B fontsrv
[
.B -m
.I mtpt
]
[
.B -s
.I srvname
]
.PP
.B fontsrv
.B -p
.I path
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Fontsrv
presents the host window system's fonts
in the standard Plan 9 format
(see
.MR font (7) ).
It serves a virtual directory tree mounted at
.I mtpt
(if the
.B -m
option is given)
and posted at
.I srvname
(default
.IR font ).
.PP
The
.B -p
option changes
.IR fontsrv 's
behavior: rather than serve a file system,
.I fontsrv
prints to standard output the contents of the named
.IR path .
If
.I path
names a directory in the served file system,
.I fontsrv
lists the directory's contents.
.PP
The fonts are arranged in a two-level tree.
The root contains directories named for each system font.
Each font directory contains subdirectories named for
a point size and whether the subfonts are anti-aliased:
.B 10
(bitmap)
.BR 10a
(anti-aliased greyscale)
.BR 12 ,
.BR 12a ,
and so on.
The font directory will synthesize additional sizes on
demand: looking up
.B 19a
will synthesize the 19-point anti-aliased size
if possible.
Each size directory contains a
.B font
file and subfont files
named
.BR x0000.bit ,
.BR x0020.bit ,
and so on
representing 32-character Unicode ranges.
.PP
.I Openfont
(see
.MR graphics (3) )
recognizes font paths beginning with
.B /mnt/font
and implements them by invoking
.IR fontsrv ;
it need not be running already.
See
.MR font (7)
for a full discussion of font name syntaxes.
.SH EXAMPLES
List the fonts on the system:
.IP
.EX
% fontsrv &
% 9p ls font
.EE
.LP
or:
.IP
.EX
% fontsrv -p .
.EE
.LP
Run
.MR acme (1)
using the operating system's Monaco as the fixed-width font:
.IP
.EX
% acme -F /mnt/font/Monaco/13a/font
.EE
.LP
Run
.MR sam (1)
using the same font:
.IP
.EX
% font=/mnt/font/Monaco/13a/font sam
.EE
.SH SOURCE
.B \*9/src/cmd/fontsrv
.SH SEE ALSO
.MR font (7)
.SH BUGS
.PP
Due to OS X restrictions,
.I fontsrv
does not fork itself into the background
when serving a user-level file system.
.PP
.I Fontsrv
has no support for X11 fonts;
on X11 systems, it will serve an empty top-level directory.
.PP
On OS X, the anti-aliased bitmaps are not perfect.
For example, the lower case r in the subfont
.B Times-Roman/14a/x0000.bit
appears truncated on the right and
too light overall.
