.TH TAPEFS 4
.SH NAME
32vfs, cpiofs, tapfs, tarfs, tpfs, v6fs, v10fs, zipfs \- mount archival file systems
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B fs/32vfs
[
.B -b
.I blocksize
]
[
.B -m
.I mountpoint
]
[
.B -p
.I passwd
]
[
.B -g
.I group
]
.I file
.br
.B fs/cpiofs
.br
.B fs/tapfs
.br
.B fs/tarfs
.br
.B fs/tpfs
.br
.B fs/v6fs
.br
.B fs/v10fs
.br
.B fs/zipfs
.br
.SH DESCRIPTION
These commands interpret data from traditional tape or file system formats
stored in
.IR file ,
and mount their contents (read-only) into a Plan 9 file system.
The optional
.B -p
and
.B -g
flags specify Unix-format password (respectively group) files
that give the mapping between the numeric user- and group-ID
numbers on the media and the strings reported by Plan 9 status
inquiries.
The
.B -m
flag introduces the name at which the new file system should be
attached; the default is
.BR /n/tapefs .
.PP
.I 32vfs
interprets raw disk images of 32V systems, which are ca. 1978 research Unix systems for
the VAX (512 byte block size, the default), and also pre-FFS Berkeley VAX systems (1KB block size).
.PP
.I Cpiofs
interprets
.B cpio
tape images (constructed with
.BI cpio 's
.B c
flag).
.PP
.I Tarfs
interprets
.I tar
tape images.
.PP
.I Tpfs
interprets
.I tp
tapes from the Fifth through Seventh Edition research Unix systems.
.PP
.I Tapfs
interprets
.I tap
tapes from the pre-Fifth Edition era.
.PP
.I V6fs
interprets disk images from the
Fifth and Sixth edition research Unix systems (512B block size).
.PP
.I V10fs
interprets disk images from the
Tenth Edition research Unix systems (4KB block size).
.PP
.I Zipfs
interprets zip archives (see
.MR gzip (1) ).
.SH SOURCE
.PP
These commands are constructed in a highly stereotyped
way using the files
.I fs.c
and
.I util.c
in
.BR \*9/src/cmd/tapefs ,
which in
turn derive substantially from
.MR ramfs (4) .
.SH "SEE ALSO
.MR intro (7) ,
.MR ramfs (4) .
