.TH VACFS 4
.SH NAME
vacfs \- a Venti-based file system
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B vacfs
[
.B -dip
]
[
.B -h
.I host
]
[
.B -m
.I mtpt
]
[
.B -s
.I srvname
]
[
.B -M
.I mem
]
.I vacfile
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Vacfs
interprets the file system created by
.MR vac (1)
so that it can be mounted into a Plan 9 file hierarchy.
The data for the file system is stored on a Venti server
with a root fingerprint specified in
.IR vacfile .
.I Vacfs
is currently rather limited: access is read-only,
clients are not authenticated, and groups are assumed to
contain a single member with the same name.
These restrictions should eventually be removed.
.PP
Options to
.I vacfs
are:
.TP
.B -d
Print debugging information to standard error.
.TP
.BI -h " host
The network address of the Venti server.
The default is taken from the environment variable
.BR venti .
If this variable does not exist, then the default is the
metaname
.BR $venti .
.\" which can be configured via
.\" .IR ndb (6).
.TP
.B -i
Use file descriptors 0 and 1 as the 9P communication channel rather than create a pipe.
.TP
.BI -m " mtpt
The location to mount the file system. The default is not to mount.
.TP
.BI -p
Disables permission checking.
.TP
.B -s
The name of the 9P service to post.
The default is
.BR vacfs. name \fR,
where
.I name
is
.I vacfile
without any directory name or
.L .vac
extension.
.TP
.BI -M " mem
The amount of memory, in bytes, allocated to the block cache. The default is 16M.
.PD
.SH SOURCE
.B \*9/src/cmd/vac
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.MR vac (1) ,
Plan 9's
.IR venti (8)
