.TH NM 1
.SH NAME
nm \- name list (symbol table)
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B nm
[
.B -aghnsu
]
.I file ...
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Nm
prints the name list of each executable or object
.I file
in the argument list.
If the
.I file
is an archive
(see
.IR ar (1)),
the name list of each file in the archive is printed.
If more than one file is given in the argument list,
the name of each file is printed at the beginning of each line.
.PP
Each symbol name is preceded by its hexadecimal
value (blanks if undefined)
and one of the letters
.TP
.B T
text segment symbol
.PD0
.TP
.B t
static text segment symbol
.TP
.B L
leaf function text segment symbol
.TP
.B l
static leaf function text segment symbol
.TP
.B D
data segment symbol
.TP
.B d
static data segment symbol
.TP
.B B
bss segment symbol
.TP
.B b
static bss segment symbol
.TP
.B a
automatic (local) variable symbol
.TP
.B p
function parameter symbol
.TP
.B z
source file name
.TP
.B Z
source file line offset
.TP
.B f
source file name components
.PD
.PP
The output is sorted alphabetically.
.PP
Options are:
.TP
.B -a
Print all symbols; normally only user-defined text, data,
and bss segment symbols are printed.
.TP
.B -g
Print only global
.RB ( T ,
.BR L ,
.BR D ,
.BR B )
symbols.
.TP
.B -h
Do not print file name headers with output lines.
.TP
.B -n
Sort according to the address of the symbols.
.TP
.B -s
Don't sort; print in symbol-table order.
.TP
.B -u
Print only undefined symbols.
.SH SOURCE
.B /sys/src/cmd/nm.c
.SH SEE ALSO
.IR ar (1),
.IR 2l (1), 
.IR db (1),
.IR acid (1),
.IR a.out (6)

