.TH CODEREVIEW 1
.SH NAME
codereview \- review of submitted changes (experimental)
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B git
.B diff
.B HEAD
.I path ...
.PP
.B codereview
[
.B -v
]
.B create
.I name
[
.B -a
]
.PP
.B codereview
[
.B -v
]
.B commit
[
.B -a
]
.PP
.B codereview
[
.B -v
]
.B upload
.PP
.B codereview
[
.B -v
]
.B pending
.PP
.B codereview
[
.B -v
]
.B sync
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Codereview
manages the review and submission of changes to the Plan 9 from User Space project.
It must be used from within a Plan 9 from User Space tree
checked out via Git
(see
.IR git (1)).
.PP
A developer makes changes to a local copy of the tree,
reviews them by using
.I git
.I diff
.IR HEAD 
and then commits them to a ``feature branch''
using
.I codereview
.IR create .
.I Git
requires that changes be added to a ``staging area'' before the initial commit,
using commands such as
.I git
.I add
and
.I git
.IR rm .
The 
.B -a
option causes
.I codereview
.I create
to add all local modifications to the staging area as part of the initial commit.
.PP
Once a feature branch is created, files can still be edited, but they must then be
incorporated into the change by using
.I codereview
.IR commit .
.PP
If other changes have been committed since the feature branch was created,
.I codereview
.I sync
will update it to be based on the most recent copy of the repository.
.PP
When the code is ready for review,
.I codereview
.I upload
uploads the change to 
.HR https://plan9port-review.googlesource.com/
for review.
In order to upload, 
.I git
must have access to a 
.I $HOME/.netrc
that contains a password obtained from
.HR https://plan9port-review.googlesource.com/#/settings/http-password .
.PP
The most likely initial result of a code review is suggestions for
improving the code.
After making those changes, repeat the
.I codereview
.I commit
and 
.I codereview
.I upload
steps.
.PP
Once the code is ready, it will be submitted by the reviewer using the web interface.
At that point,
.I codereview
.I sync
.PP
The
.I codereview
.I pending
command lists the active feature branches.
.PP
All the
.I codereview
commands take a leading
.B -v
option, which causes them to print
.I git
commands being executed.
This can be useful for debugging
.IR codereview .
.PP
The
.I codereview
command depends on a 
.I git
``commit hook''
script being in place to add
.L Change-Id
lines to the commit messages.
.I Codereview
installs the hook at startup, if necessary,
by adding a symbolic link from
.B $PLAN9/.git/hooks/commit-msg
to
.BR $PLAN9/lib/git/commit-msg.hook .
.SH SEE ALSO
.IR git (1),
.HR http://plan9port-review.googlesource.com/
.SH BUGS
.I Git
is too complicated to use.
The 
.I codereview
script helps, but a working understanding of
.I git
is still required.
