.TH FMT 1
.SH NAME
fmt, htmlfmt \- simple text formatters
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B fmt
[
.I option ...
]
[
.I file ...
]
.PP
.B htmlfmt
[
.B -a
] [
.B -c
.I charset
] [
.B -u
.I url
] [
.I file ...
]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Fmt
copies the given
.I files
(standard input by default)
to its standard output, filling and indenting lines.
The options are
.TP
.BI -l " n
Output line length is
.IR n ,
including indent (default 70).
.TP
.BI -w " n
A synonym for
.BR -l .
.TP
.BI -i " n
Indent
.I n
spaces (default 0).
.TP
.BI -j
Do not join short lines: only fold long lines.
.PP
Empty lines and initial white space in input lines are preserved.
Empty lines are inserted between input files.
.PP
.I Fmt
is idempotent: it leaves already formatted text unchanged.
.PP
.I Htmlfmt
performs a similar service, but accepts as input text formatted with
HTML tags.
It accepts
.IR fmt 's
.B -l
and
.B -w
flags and also:
.TP
.BI -a
Normally
.I htmlfmt
suppresses the contents of form fields and anchors (URLs and image files); this flag
causes it to print them, in square brackets.
.TP
.BI -c " charset
change the default character set from iso-8859-1 to
.IR charset .
This is the character set assumed if there isn't one
specified by the html itself in a <meta> directive.
.TP
.BI -u " url
Use
.I url
as the base URL for the document when displaying anchors; sets
.BI -a .
.SH SOURCE
.B /sys/src/cmd/fmt.c
.PP
.B /sys/src/cmd/htmlfmt
.SH BUGS
.I Htmlfmt
makes no attempt to render the two-dimensional geometry of tables;
it just treats the table entries as plain, to-be-formatted text.
