.TH GIT 1
.SH NAME
git, hg, cvs, codereview \- introduction to using plan9port Git repository
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B git
.B clone
.B https://9fans.github.io/plan9port
.B plan9
.PP
.B git
.B pull
.PP
.B git
.B diff
.I revision
[
.I path ...
]
.PP
.B gitk
.PP
.B web
.B https://9fans.github.io/plan9port
.SH DESCRIPTION
The master source tree for Plan 9 from User Space is maintained
using the source control system Git.
.PP
The first argument to
.I git
is a command, which determines the form of the rest of the command line.
.PP
The
.B clone
command downloads a copy of the tree into the directory
.BR plan9 ,
which it will create.
After
.B git
.BR clone ,
the other commands listed
should be run within the
.B plan9
directory tree.
.PP
Git downloads the entire revision history
of Plan 9 from User Space
in addition to the current tree.
.PP
.I Git
.I pull
incorporates changes from the master repository
into the local revision history and applies them to the
current file tree.
.PP
.I Git
.I diff
runs Unix's
.MR diff (1)
to compare the files in the local tree with the corresponding
files in the revision history.
The special revision
.B HEAD
refers to the most recent version in the version history.
.PP
.I Gitk
starts an interactive history viewer.
.PP
The Git tree can be inspected on the web at
.HR https://github.com/9fans/plan9port "" .
.SH FILES
.TP
.B \*9/.git
directory containing Git local repository
.TP
.B .gitignore
list of files and wildcards to exclude from Git operations
.SH SEE ALSO
Unix's
.IR git (1),
.HR http://git-scm.com/doc
.PP
.HR https://9fans.github.io/plan9port/
.SH BUGS
Plan 9 from User Space is no longer accessible using CVS or Mercurial;
you must use Git.
