.TH HG 1
.SH NAME 
hg, cvs \- introduction to using plan9port Mercurial repository
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B hg
.B clone
.B http://code.swtch.com/plan9port
.B plan9
.PP
.B hg
.B pull
.B -u
.PP
.B hg
.B diff
[
.B -r
.I revision
]
[
.I path ...
]
.PP
.B hg 
.B serve
.PP
.B hg 
.B view
.PP
.B web
.B http://code.swtch.com/plan9port
.SH DESCRIPTION
The master source tree for Plan 9 from User Space is maintained
using the source control system Mercurial
as a substitute for Plan 9's
\fIreplica\fR(8) and dump file system.
.PP
The first argument to
.I hg
is a command, which determines the form of the rest of the command line.
.PP
The
.B clone
command downloads a copy of the tree into the directory
.BR plan9 ,
which it will create.
After
.B hg
.BR clone ,
the other commands listed 
should be run within the
.B plan9
directory tree.
.PP
Unlike CVS, Mercurial downloads the entire revision history
of Plan 9 from User Space 
in addition to the current tree.
.PP
.I Hg
.I pull
incorporates changes from the master repository
into the local revision history.
The 
.B -u
flag applies these changes to the current file tree.
.PP
.I Hg
.I diff
runs Unix's
.IR diff (1)
to compare the files in the local tree with the corresponding
files in the revision history.
By default it compares against the version that was most recently
incorporated into the local tree.
The
.B -r
flag specifies an alternate version to compare against.
The special revision
.B tip
refers to the most recent version on the server.
.PP
.I Hg
.I serve
starts an HTTP server serving information about
the local repository at the address
.BR http://localhost:8000/ .
.PP
.I Hg
.I view
starts an interactive history viewer.
.PP
The Mercurial tree can be inspected on the web at
.HR http://code.swtch.com/plan9port/ "" .
.SH FILES
.TP
.B \*9/.hg
directory containing Mercurial local repository
.TP
.B .hgignore
list of files and wildcards to exclude from Mercurial operations
.SH SEE ALSO
.IR codereview (1)
.PP
Unix's
\fIhg\fR(1),
.HR http://www.selenic.com/mercurial/wiki/
.PP
.HR http://code.swtch.com/plan9port/
.SH BUGS
Plan 9 from User Space is no longer accessible using CVS;
you must use Mercurial.
