.TH HTMLROFF 1
.SH NAME
htmlroff \- HTML formatting and typesetting
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B htmlroff
[
.B -iuv
]
[
.B -m
.I name
]
[
.B -r
.I aN
]
[
.I file
\&...
]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Htmlroff
accepts
.MR troff (1)
input in the named 
.I files
and formats it as HTML for viewing in a web browser.
.PP
If no
.I file
argument is given, 
.I htmlroff
reads the standard input.
An argument consisting of a single minus
.RB ( - )
is taken to be
a file name corresponding to the standard input.
The options are:
.TP
.B -i
Read standard input after the input files are exhausted.
.TP
.BI -m name
Process the macro file
.BI \*9/tmac/tmac. name
before the input
.IR files .
.TP
.BI -r aN
Set register
.I a
(one character name) to
.IR N .
.TP
.B -u
Generate UTF output.
By default, 
.I htmlroff
converts Unicode runes into the corresponding
HTML entity sequences
.RB ( &alpha; ,
.BR &nbsp; ,
and so on).
.I Htmlroff
invokes
.MR tcs (1)
for the conversion.
.TP
.B -v
Generate debugging output and warnings about suspicious input.
.PD
.PP
Most 
.I troff
input files, especially those using the
.MR ms (7)
macros, can be used unaltered.
In general, the macro file
.B tmac.html
should be processed after processing other standard macro files,
as in 
.B htmlroff
.B -ms
.BR -mhtml .
.PP
.MR Htmlroff (7)
describes the changes to the input language.
.PP
.MR Mhtml (7)
describes the new macros.
.SH EXAMPLES
Format the Plan 9 web page:
.IP
.EX
cd /usr/web/plan9
htmlroff -mhtml index.tr >index.html
.EE
.PP
Format a paper:
.IP
.EX
cd /sys/doc
pic auth.ms | tbl | eqn | htmlroff -ms -mhtml >auth.html
.EE
.SH FILES
.TP
.B \*9/troff/font/devutf/utfmap
Mapping from
.I troff
two-character names like
.B \e(*a
to Unicode characters like α.
.SH SOURCE
.B \*9/src/cmd/htmlroff
.SH "SEE ALSO
.MR tcs (1) ,
.MR troff (1) ,
.MR htmlroff (7) ,
.MR mhtml (7)
