.TH INSTALL 1
.SH NAME
install \- notes about Plan 9 from User Space installation
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B
cd \*9; ./INSTALL
[
.B -b
|
.B -c
] [
.B -r
.I path
]
.SH DESCRIPTION
To obtain the Plan 9 tree, use Git
(see
.MR git 1 )
or download a tar file from
.HR https://9fans.github.io/plan9port "" .
.PP
The tree can be unpacked anywhere, but the
usual place is
.BR /usr/local/plan9 .
In the root of the tree, run
.BR ./INSTALL .
This script builds the Plan 9 build program
.MR mk 1
if necessary,
cleans all previously built object files and libraries out of the tree,
rebuilds and installs everything, and then cleans up.
.PP
There are a few files in tree which have the root
hard-coded in them.
After the build,
.I INSTALL
edits these files to replace the string
.B /usr/local/plan9
with the name of the root of the current tree.
.PP
Finally,
.I INSTALL
builds an HTML version of the manual and installs it in
.BR \*9/man .
.SS Installation scenarios
There are three common ways to install the tree:
.PP
.B "1. Build and run in /usr/local/plan9."
This is the simplest and most common case.
Unpack the tree into
.B /usr/local/plan9
and run
.BR ./INSTALL .
.PP
.B "2. Build and run somewhere else."
Unpack the tree wherever you like, for example
.BR $HOME/plan9 ,
and run
.BR ./INSTALL .
The script detects the current directory and
edits the hard-coded paths accordingly.
Set
.B $PLAN9
to point to the tree in your shell profile.
.PP
.B "3. Build in one location, install to another."
The installation can be thought of as two steps:
build all the binaries, and then edit files as necessary
to fix the references to the installation root.
Given the
.B -b
flag,
.I INSTALL
performs only the first step.
Given the
.B -c
flag,
.I INSTALL
performs only the second step.
The first step can be done with the tree in a temporary work directory,
but the second step must be done once the tree is in its final location.
Use
.B -r
.I path
to specify the
.I final
location of the Plan 9 tree.
For example, to build in a temporary directory and
install to
.BR /opt/plan9 :
.IP
.EX
cd /tmp/plan9port && ./INSTALL -b -r /opt/plan9
cp -a . /opt/plan9
cd /opt/plan9 && ./INSTALL -c
.EE
.PP
These flags are only necessary when trying to conform to the
expectations of certain package management systems.
.SS Environment
At the end of the installation,
.I INSTALL
prints suggested settings for the environment variables
.B $PLAN9
and
.BR $PATH .
.PP
.I INSTALL
writes various autodetected settings to
.BR \*9/config .
The file
.B \*9/LOCAL.config
is appended to
.B config
after this auto-detection and can be used to override the choices.
If
.B LOCAL.config
contains a line
.B WSYSTYPE=nowsys
then the system is built without using X11 or SDL3.
Setting
.B WSYSTYPE=sdl3
or
.B WSYSTYPE=x11
forces a specific graphics backend.
.B LOCAL.config
may also list settings for
.B CC9
(the host C compiler)
and
.B CC9FLAGS
(any additional flags to pass to the compiler).
Values more complex than single words should be quoted
with single quotes.
.SS Graphics backend
On most Linux systems, the graphical programs
.RI ( acme ,
.IR 9term ,
etc.) require either SDL3 or X11 libraries.
If SDL3 development libraries are installed,
the build will prefer SDL3,
which provides native Wayland support.
On Debian and Ubuntu, install
.BR libsdl3-dev .
To fall back to X11, either uninstall SDL3
or set
.B WSYSTYPE=x11
in
.BR LOCAL.config .
.PP
For X11 builds, the X11 header packages need to be installed.
On Debian, the required packages are
libfontconfig1-dev, libx11-dev, libxext-dev, and libxt-dev.
On Ubuntu, it suffices to install xorg-dev.
.SS Rebuilding
.I INSTALL
can safely be repeated to rebuild the system from scratch.
.PP
Once the system is built for the first time,
it can be maintained and rebuilt using
.MR mk 1 .
To rebuild individual commands or libraries,
run
.B mk
.B install
and
.B mk
.B clean
in the appropriate source directory
(see
.MR src 1 ).
.SH FILES
.TP
.B \*9/lib/moveplan9.files
the list of files that need to have
.B /usr/local/plan9
edited out of them
.TP
.B \*9/lib/moveplan9.sh
the script that edits the files
.TP
.B \*9/src/mkmk.sh
the shell script used to build
.MR mk 1
.TP
.B \*9/dist/manweb
the shell script that builds the HTML manual
.TP
.B \*9/man/index.html
the top-level page in the HTML version of the manual
.TP
.B \*9/install.log
logged output from the last run of
.I INSTALL
.TP
.B \*9/install.sum
a summary of
.B install.log
.SH SEE ALSO
.MR intro 1 ,
.MR git 1
