.TH MAN 1
.SH NAME
man, lookman, sig \- print or find pages of this manual
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B man
[
.B -hnpPtw
]
[
.I section ...
]
[
.B --
]
.I title ...
.PP
.B lookman
.I key ...
.PP
.B sig
.I function ...
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Man
locates and prints pages of this manual named
.I title
in the specified
.IR sections .
.I Title
is given in lower case.
Each
.I section
is a number;
pages marked (2S), for example,
belong to chapter 2.
If no
.I section
is specified, pages 
in all sections are printed.
Any name from the
.SM NAME
section at the top of the page will serve as a
.IR title .
.PP
The options are:
.TP
.B -h
Print the pages to HTML and send to a web browser with
.MR web (1) .
.TP
.B -n
(Default)
Print the pages on the standard output using
.IR nroff .
.TP
.B -p
Run
.MR proof (1)
on the specified man pages.
.TP
.B -P
Run
.MR page (1)
on the specified man pages.
.TP
.B -t
Run
.MR troff (1)
and send its output
to standard output.
.TP
.B -w
Print the file names for the pages.
.PD
.PP
.B Lookman
prints the names of all manual sections that contain
all of the
.I key
words given on the command line.
.PP
.B Sig
prints the signature (i.e. C definition) of the
.IR function 's
given on the command line.
.SH FILES
.TP
.B \*9/man?/*.[0-9]*
.I troff
source for manual; this page is
.B \*9/man/man1/man.1
.TP
.B \*9/man?/*.html
HTML version of the manual
.TP
.B \*9/man/man?/INDEX
indices searched to find pages corresponding to titles
.TP
.B \*9/man/secindex
command to make an index for a given section
.TP
.B \*9/man/lookman.index
index for
.I lookman
.SH SOURCE
.B \*9/bin/man
.br
.B \*9/bin/lookman
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.MR page (1) ,
.MR proof (1)
.SH BUGS
The manual was intended to be typeset; some detail is sacrificed on text terminals.
.PP
There is no automatic mechanism to keep the indices up to date.
.PP
Except for special cases,
.I man
doesn't recognize things that should be run through
.I tbl
and/or
.IR eqn .
.PP
The HTML manual is not maintained automatically.
To update it:
.IP
.EX
cd \*9/dist
mk man
.EE
