.TH NDB 1
.SH NAME
ndbquery, ndbmkhash, ndbmkdb, ndbipquery, ndbmkhosts \- network database
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ndbquery
[
.B -f
.I dbfile
]
.I "attr value"
[
.I rattr
]
.br
.B ndbipquery
.I "attr value"
.I rattr...
.br
.B ndbmkhash
.I "file attr"
.br
.B ndbmkdb
.SH DESCRIPTION
The network database holds administrative information used by
.I authdial
(see
.MR authsrv (3) )
and
.MR secstored (1) .
.PP
.I Ndbquery 
searches the database for an attribute of type
.I attr
and value
.IR value .
If
.I rattr
is not specified, all entries matched by the search are returned.
If 
.I rattr
is specified, the value of the first pair with attribute
.I rattr
of all the matched entries is returned.
.PP
.I Ndbipquery
uses
.I ndbipinfo
(see
.MR ndb (3) )
to search for the values of the attributes
.I rattr
corresponding to the system
with entries of attribute type
.I attr
and
value
.IR value .
.PP
.I Ndbmkhash
creates a hash file for all entries with attribute
.I attr
in database file
.IR file .
The hash files are used by 
.I ndbquery
and by the ndb library routines.
.\" .PP
.\" .I Ndb/cs
.\" is a server used by
.\" .IR dial (2)
.\" to translate network names.
.\" It is started at boot time.
.\" It finds out what networks are configured
.\" by looking for
.\" .B /net/*/clone
.\" when it starts.
.\" It can also be told about networks by writing
.\" to
.\" .B /net/cs
.\" a message of the form:
.\" .IP
.\" .B "add net1 net2 ..."
.\" .PP
.\" .I Ndb/cs
.\" also sets the system name in
.\" .B /dev/sysname
.\" if it can figure it out.
.\" The options are:
.\" .TP
.\" .B -f
.\" supplies the name of the data base file to use,
.\" default
.\" .BR /lib/ndb/local .
.\" .TP
.\" .B -x
.\" specifies the mount point of the
.\" network.
.\" .TP
.\" .B -n
.\" causes cs to do nothing but set the system name.
.\" .PP
.\" .I Ndb/csquery
.\" can be used to query
.\" .I ndb/cs
.\" to see how it resolves addresses.
.\" .I Ndb/csquery
.\" prompts for addresses and prints out what
.\" .I ndb/cs
.\" returns.
.\" .I Server
.\" defaults to
.\" .BR /net/cs .
.\" If any
.\" .I addrs
.\" are specified,
.\" .I ndb/csquery
.\" prints their translations and immediately exits.
.\" The exit status will be nil only if all addresses 
.\" were successfully translated
.\" The
.\" .B -s
.\" flag sets exit status without printing any results.
.\" .PP
.\" .I Ndb/dns
.\" is a server used by
.\" .I ndb/cs
.\" and by remote systems to translate Internet domain names.
.\" .I Ndb/dns
.\" is started at boot time.
.\" By default
.\" .I dns
.\" serves only requests written to
.\" .BR /net/dns .
.\" The options are:
.\" .TP
.\" .B -f
.\" supplies the name of the data base file to use,
.\" default
.\" .BR /lib/ndb/local .
.\" .TP
.\" .B -x
.\" specifies the mount point of the
.\" network.
.\" .TP
.\" .B -s
.\" also answer domain requests sent to UDP port 53.
.\" .TP
.\" .B -n
.\" whenever a zone that we serve changes, send UDP NOTIFY
.\" messages to any dns slaves for that zone.
.\" .TP
.\" .B -z
.\" whenever we receive a UDP NOTIFY message, run
.\" .I program
.\" with the domain name of the area as its argument.
.\" .TP
.\" .B -r
.\" defer to other servers to resolve queries.
.\" .PP
.\" When the
.\" .B -r
.\" option is specified, the servers used come from the
.\" .I dns
.\" attribute in the database.  For example, to specify a set of dns servers that
.\" will resolve requests for systems on the network
.\" .IR mh-net :
.\" .EX
.\" 
.\" ipnet=mh-net ip=135.104.0.0 ipmask=255.255.0.0
.\" 	dns=ns1.cs.bell-labs.com
.\" 	dns=ns2.cs.bell-labs.com
.\" dom=ns1.cs.bell-labs.com ip=135.104.1.11
.\" dom=ns2.cs.bell-labs.com ip=135.104.1.12
.\" 
.\" .EE
.\" .PP
.\" The server for a domain is indicated by a database entry containing
.\" both a
.\" .I dom
.\" and a
.\" .I ns
.\" attribute.
.\" For example, the entry for the Internet root is:
.\" .EX
.\" 
.\" dom=
.\" 	ns=A.ROOT-SERVERS.NET
.\" 	ns=B.ROOT-SERVERS.NET
.\" 	ns=C.ROOT-SERVERS.NET
.\" dom=A.ROOT-SERVERS.NET ip=198.41.0.4
.\" dom=B.ROOT-SERVERS.NET ip=128.9.0.107
.\" dom=C.ROOT-SERVERS.NET ip=192.33.4.12
.\" 
.\" .EE
.\" The last three lines provide a mapping for the
.\" server names to their ip addresses.  This is only
.\" a hint and will be superseded from whatever is learned
.\" from servers owning the domain.
.\" .PP
.\" You can also serve a subtree of the domain name space from the local
.\" database.  You indicate subtrees that you'ld like to serve by
.\" adding an
.\" .B soa=
.\" attribute to the root entry.
.\" For example, the Bell Labs CS research domain is:
.\" .EX
.\" 
.\" dom=cs.bell-labs.com soa=
.\" 	refresh=3600 ttl=3600
.\" 	ns=plan9.bell-labs.com
.\" 	ns=ns1.cs.bell-labs.com
.\" 	ns=ns2.cs.bell-labs.com
.\" 	mb=presotto@plan9.bell-labs.com
.\" 	mx=mail.research.bell-labs.com pref=20
.\" 	mx=plan9.bell-labs.com pref=10
.\" 	dnsslave=nslocum.cs.bell-labs.com
.\" 	dnsslave=vex.cs.bell-labs.com
.\" 
.\" .EE
.\" Here, the
.\" .B mb
.\" entry is the mail address of the person responsible for the
.\" domain (default
.\" .BR postmaster ).
.\" The
.\" .B mx
.\" entries list mail exchangers for the domain name and
.\" .B refresh
.\" and
.\" .B ttl
.\" define the area refresh interval and the minimum TTL for
.\" records in this domain.
.\" The
.\" .B dnsslave
.\" entries specify slave DNS servers that should be notified
.\" when the domain changes.  The notification also requires
.\" the
.\" .B -n
.\" flag.
.\" .PP
.\" You can also serve reverse lookups (returning the name that
.\" goes with an IP address) by adding an
.\" .B soa=
.\" attribute to the entry defining the root of the reverse space.
.\" For example, to provide reverse lookup for all addresses in
.\" starting with 135.104 you must have a record like:
.\" .EX
.\" 
.\" dom=104.135.in-addr.arpa soa=
.\" 	refresh=3600 ttl=3600
.\" 	ns=plan9.bell-labs.com
.\" 	ns=ns1.cs.bell-labs.com
.\" 	ns=ns2.cs.bell-labs.com
.\" .EE
.\" Notice the form of the reverse address, i.e., it's the bytes of the
.\" address range you are serving reversed and with
.\" .B .in-addr.arpa
.\" appended.  This is a standard form for a domain name in an IPv4 PTR record.
.\" .PP
.\" If such an entry exists in the database, reverse addresses will
.\" automaticly be generated from any IP addresses in the database
.\" that are under this root.  For example
.\" .EX
.\" 
.\" dom=ns1.cs.bell-labs.com ip=135.104.1.11
.\" .EE
.\" will automaticly create both forward and reverse entries for
.\" .B ns1.cs.bell-labs.com .
.\" Unlike other DNS servers, there's no way to generate
.\" inconsistent forward and reverse entries.
.\" .PP
.\" Delegation of a further subtree to another set of name servers
.\" is indicated by an
.\" .B soa=delegated
.\" attribute.
.\" .EX
.\" 
.\" dom=bignose.cs.research.bell-labs.com
.\" 	soa=delegated
.\" 	ns=anna.cs.research.bell-labs.com
.\" 	ns=dj.cs.research.bell-labs.com
.\" 
.\" .EE
.\" Nameservers within the delegated domain (as in this example)
.\" must have their IP addresses listed elsewhere in
.\" .I ndb
.\" files.
.\" .PP
.\" Wild-carded domain names can also be used.
.\" For example, to specify a mail forwarder for all Bell Labs research systems:
.\" .EX
.\" 
.\" dom=*.research.bell-labs.com
.\" 	mx=research.bell-labs.com
.\" 
.\" .EE
.\" `Cname' aliases may be established by adding a
.\" .B cname
.\" attribute giving the real domain name;
.\" the name attached to the
.\" .B dom
.\" attribute is the alias.
.\" `Cname' aliases are severely restricted;
.\" the aliases may have no other attributes than
.\" .B dom
.\" and are daily further restricted in their use by new RFCs.
.\" .EX
.\" 
.\" cname=anna.cs.research.bell-labs.com dom=www.cs.research.bell-labs.com
.\" 
.\" .EE
.\" .I Ndb/dnsquery
.\" can be used to query
.\" .I ndb/dns
.\" to see how it resolves requests.
.\" .I Ndb/dnsquery
.\" prompts for commands of the form
.\" .IP
.\" .I "domain-name request-type"
.\" .LP
.\" where
.\" .I request-type
.\" can be
.\" .BR ip ,
.\" .BR mx ,
.\" .BR ns ,
.\" .BR cname ,
.\" .BR ptr ....
.\" In the case of the inverse query type,
.\" .BR ptr ,
.\" .I dnsquery
.\" will reverse the ip address and tack on the
.\" .B .in-addr.arpa
.\" for you.
.\" .PP
.\" .I Ndb/dnsdebug
.\" is like
.\" .I ndb/dnsquery
.\" but bypasses the local server.
.\" It communicates via UDP with the domain name servers
.\" in the same way that the local resolver would and displays
.\" all packets received.
.\" The query can be specified on the command line or
.\" can be prompted for.
.\" The queries look like those of
.\" .I ndb/dnsquery
.\" with one addition.
.\" .I Ndb/dnsdebug
.\" can be directed to query a particular name server by
.\" the command
.\" .BI @ name-server\f1.
.\" From that point on, all queries go to that name server
.\" rather than being resolved by
.\" .IR dnsdebug .
.\" The
.\" .B @
.\" command returns query resolution to
.\" .IR dnsdebug .
.\" Finally, any command preceded by a
.\" .BI @ name-server
.\" sets the name server only for that command.
.\" .PP
.\" Normally
.\" .I dnsdebug
.\" uses the
.\" .B /net
.\" interface and the database file
.\" .BR /lib/ndb/local.
.\" The
.\" .B -x
.\" option directs
.\" .I dnsdebug
.\" to use the
.\" .B /net.alt
.\" interface and
.\" .B /lib/ndb/external
.\" file.
.\" The
.\" .B -r
.\" option is the same as for
.\" .IR ndb/dns .
.PP
.I Ndbmkdb
is used in concert with
.MR awk (1)
scripts to convert
uucp systems files and IP host files
into database files.
It is very specific to the situation at Murray Hill.
.PP
When the database files change underfoot,
running programs
track them properly.  Nonetheless, to keep the database searches efficient
it is necessary to run
.I ndbmkhash
whenever the files are modified.
It may be profitable to control this by a frequent
.MR cron (8)
job.
.PP
.I Ndbmkhosts
generates a BSD style 
.BR hosts ,
.BR hosts.txt ,
and
.B hosts.equiv
files from ndb data base files specified on the
command line (default
.B \*9/ndb/local
and
.BR \*9/ndb/friends ).
It only processes hosts whose domain names end in
.IR domname .
The output files are named
.BI db. domname \fR,
.BI equiv. domname \fR,
and
.BI txt. domname \fR.
For historical reasons, the default
.I domname
is
.BR research.att.com.
.SH EXAMPLE
.IP
.EX
% ndbquery sys helix
sys=helix dom=helix.research.bell-labs.com bootf=/mips/9powerboot
	ip=135.104.117.31 ether=080069020427
	proto=il 
.EE
.SH FILES
.TP
.B \*9/ndb/local
first database file searched
.TP
.B \*9/ndb/local.*
hash files for
.B \*9/ndb/local
.SH SOURCE
.B \*9/src/cmd/ndb
.SH SEE ALSO
.MR ndb (3) ,
.MR ndb (7)
