.TH NETFILES 1
.SH NAME
Netfiles, netfileget, netfileput, netfilestat \- network file access inside acme
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B Netfiles
.PP
.B netfileget
[
.B -d
]
.I system
.I path
.PP
.B netfileput
.I system
.I path
.PP
.B netfilestat
.I system
.I path
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B Netfiles
presents remote file systems in
.MR acme (4)
windows.
Each window is named
.BI /n/ system / path
and displays the contents of
.I path
on 
.IR system .
.PP
.I Netfiles
reads names of windows to create from the
plumbing channel
.B netfileedit
(see
.MR plumber (4)
and the example section below).
In a
.IR netfiles -controlled
window,
.BR Get ,
.BR Put ,
and
button 3 loads work as in normal acme windows.
External commands executed with button 2
run in the directory in which
.I acme
was started.
.PP
.I Netfiles
uses the helper programs
.IR netfileget ,
.IR netfileput ,
and
.I netfilestat
to access the remote file systems.
The three first check to see if 
.I system
is a service in the current name space
(see
.MR intro (4) ).
If so, they use
.MR 9p (1)
to access it.
Otherwise, they assume that the system is a network name
and use
.MR ssh (1) 's
.I sftp
to access it.
.PP
.I Netfileget
prints the contents of the named
.I path 
to standard output.
If the
.B -d
option is given, then
.I netfileget
prints a single-column listing of
.IR path ,
which must be a directory.
Directories in the listing have
.L /
appended to their names.
.PP
.I Netfileput
writes its standard input to the named
.IR path .
.PP
.I Netfilestat
prints the file type of
.IR path ,
one of
.BR nonexistent ,
.BR directory ,
or
.BR file .
.SH EXAMPLES
The following plumbing rule 
(see
.MR plumb (7) )
passes 
.B /n/
paths to 
.IR Netfiles ,
starting it if necessary.
.IP
.EX
# /n/ paths go to simulator in acme
kind is text
data matches '[a-zA-Z0-9_\e-./]+('$addr')?'
data matches '(/n/[a-zA-Z0-9_\e-./]+)('$addr')?'
plumb to netfileedit
plumb client Netfiles
.EE
.SH SOURCE
.B \*9/src/cmd/netfiles
.SH SEE ALSO
.MR 9p (1) ,
.MR ssh (1) ,
.MR ssh-agent (1) ,
.MR intro (4) ,
.MR acme (4) ,
.MR factotum (4) ,
.HR http://v9fs.sf.net
.SH BUGS
.I Netfiles
depends on
.MR sftpcache (1) ,
which only works with OpenSSH versions 4.3 and earlier;
later versions do not print the
.B sftp>
prompt frequently enough.
