.TH PAINT 1
.CT 1 graphics
.SH NAME
paint \- create image files by drawing with a mouse or other pointing device
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B paint
[
.I file
]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Paint
displays a canvas upon which can be drawn lines using the mouse holding
down buttons 1 or 2 for foreground or background color.  The canvas
may be moved with button 3.  Colors and brush sizes may be selected by
clicking on the palette at the bottom of the screen with buttons 1 or 2.
.PP
If the optional
.I file
argument is specified, then it is read and used as the canvas.
.I Paint
only recognizes Plan 9 bitmap format (see
.MR image (6) ).
.PP
A number of immediate keyboard commands are recognized:
.TP
.B u
Undos the previous action.
.TP
.B c
Clears the canvas with the background color.
.TP
.B 1-9
Select brush size.
.TP
.B f
Select flood fill brush.
.TP
.B +
Doubles magnification.
.TP
.B -
Halves magnification.
.TP
.B esc
Centers the canvas and resets magnification.
.PP
Hitting any other key on the keyboard shows a command prompt
where the following commands may be entered:
.TP
.BI r file
Reads the canvas from
.I file.
.TP
.BI w file
Writes the canvas to
.I file.
.TP
.BI < command
Executes
.I command
and reads the canvas from its standard output.
.TP
.BI > command
Executes
.I command
and writes the canvas to its standard input.
.TP
.BI | command
Transforms the canvas by piping it thru
.I command.
.TP
.B q
Quits the program.
.SH SOURCE
.B /sys/src/cmd/paint.c
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.MR resample (1) ,
.MR rotate (1) ,
.MR crop (1) ,
.MR jpg (1) ,
.MR page (1) ,
.MR image (6)
.SH HISTORY
.I Paint
first appeared in 9front (October, 2011).
