.TH PR 1
.SH NAME
pr \- print file
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B pr
[
.I option ...
]
[
.I file ...
]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Pr
produces a printed listing of one or more
.I files
on its standard output.
The output is separated into pages headed by a date,
the name of the file or a specified header, and the page number.
With no file arguments,
.I pr
prints its standard input.
.PP
Options apply to all following files but may be reset
between files:
.TP
.BI - n
Produce
.IR n -column
output.
.TP
.BI + n
Begin printing with page
.IR  n .
.TP
.B -b
Balance columns on last page, in case of multi-column output.
.TP
.B -d
Double space.
.TP
.BI -e n
Set the tab stops for input text every
.I n
spaces.
.TP
.B  -h
Take the next argument as a page header 
.RI ( file
by default).
.TP
.BI -i n
Replace sequences of blanks in the output
by tabs, using tab stops set every
.I n
spaces.
.TP
.BI -f
Use form feeds to separate pages.
.TP
.BI -l n
Take the length of the page to be
.I n
lines instead of the default 66.
.TP
.B  -m
Print all
.I files
simultaneously,
each in one column.
.TP
.BI -n m
Number the lines of each
.IR file .
The numeric argument
.IR m ,
default 5,
sets the width of the line-number field.
.TP
.BI -o n
Offset the left margin
.I n
character positions.
.TP
.BI -p
Pad each file printed to an odd number of pages.
For two-sided printers,
this will ensure each file will start a new page.
.TP
.BI -s c
Separate columns by the single character
.I c
instead of aligning them with white space.
A missing
.I c
is taken to be a tab.
.TP
.B  -t
Do not print the 5-line header or the
5-line trailer normally supplied for each page.
.TP
.BI -w n
For multi-column output,
take the width of the page to be
.I n
characters instead of the default 72.
.SH SOURCE
.B \*9/src/cmd/pr.c
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.MR cat (1) ,
.MR lp (1)
