.TH PS 1
.SH NAME
ps, psu \- process status
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ps
[
.B -pa
]
.PP
.B psu
[
.B -pa
]
[
.I user
]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Ps
prints information about processes.
.I Psu
prints only information about processes started by
.I user
(default
.BR $USER ).
.PP
For each process reported,
the user,
process id,
user time,
system time,
size,
state,
and command name are printed.
State is one of the following:
.TP \w'\fLno\ \fIresource\ \ \ 'u
.B Moribund
Process has exited and is about to have its
resources reclaimed.
.TP
.B Ready
on the queue of processes ready to be run.
.TP
.B Scheding
about to be run.
.TP
.B Running
running.
.TP
.B Queueing
waiting on a queue for a resource.
.TP
.B Wakeme
waiting for I/O or some other kernel event to wake it up.
.TP
.B Broken
dead of unnatural causes; lingering
so that it can be examined.
.TP
.B Stopped
stopped.
.TP
.B Stopwait
waiting for another process to stop.
.TP
.B Fault
servicing a page fault.
.TP
.B Idle
waiting for something to do (kernel processes only).
.TP
.B New
being created.
.TP
.B Pageout
paging out some other process.
.TP
.I Syscall
performing the named system call.
.TP
.BI no " resource
waiting for more of a critical
.IR resource .
.TP
.I wchan
waiting on the named wait channel
(on a Unix kernel).
.PD
.PP
With the
.B -p
flag,
.I ps
also prints, after the system time, the baseline and current priorities of each process.
.PP
The
.B -a
flag causes
.I ps
to print the arguments for the process.  Newlines in arguments will be translated to spaces for display.
.SH SOURCE
.B \*9/bin/ps
.br
.B \*9/bin/psu
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.MR acid (1) ,
.MR db (1) ,
.MR kill (1)
