.TH PSFONTS 1
.SH NAME
psfonts, psdownload \- add necessary fonts to PostScript document for printing
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B psfonts
[
.I files ...
]
.PP
.B psdownload
[
.B options
]
[
.I files ...
]
.SH DESCRIPTION
Plan 9's
.MR troff (1)
and
.MR tr2post (1)
use non-standard PostScript fonts
(found in
.BR \*9/postscript/font ).
Before sending PostScript output from
.I tr2post
to a standard printer, code implementing
the non-standard fonts must be added to the PostScript.
.PP
.I Psfonts
copies 
.I files
(or standard input)
to standard output, adding necessary PostScript fonts.
.PP
.I Psdownload
is the more general program used to implement
.IR psfonts .
The options are:
.TP
.BI -c " comment
Expect the fonts used in the document to be listed in
a comment beginning with this string
(default
.BR %%DocumentFonts: ).
.TP
.BI -f " atend
Expect extra fonts comments at the end of the document,
so read the entire input before starting output
(by default this only happens if a
.B %%DocumentFonts:
.B (atend)
comment is encountered).
.TP
.BI -m " mapfile
Use
.I mapfile
to translate from PostScript font names to files.
Each line in the map has two white space-separated
fields: a font name and the corresponding file.
If
.I mapfile
is not a rooted path, it is evaluated relative to the
.I fontdir
(see
.B -H
below).
.TP
.BI -p " printer
Set the name of the printer.
This option is deprecated.  Its only effect is to override the
.B -r
option, causing
.IB fontdir /printers/ printer
to be used as the resident fonts list.
.TP
.BI -r " residentfonts
Read a list of fonts assumed to be on the printer
(not necessary to re-download) from the file
.IR residentfonts .
If
.I residentfonts
is not a rooted path, it is evaluated relative to the
.I fontdir
(see
.B -H
below).
.TP
.BI -H " fontdir
Set the directory that is assumed to contain the PostScript fonts
and information about printers
(see
.BR -m ,
.BR -p ,
and
.B -r
above;
default
.BR \*9/postscript/font ).
.TP
.BI -T " tmpdir
Use
.I tmpdir
for storing temporary files
(default
.BR /var/tmp ).
.B 
.TP
.BI -D
Produce copious amounts of debugging information on standard error.
.TP
.BI -I
Continue running even after fatal errors occur.
.PD
.SH EXAMPLE
See
.MR tr2post (1)
for an example.
.SH SOURCE
.B \*9/bin/psfonts
.br
.B \*9/src/cmd/postscript/download
.SH SEE ALSO
.MR troff (1) ,
.MR tr2post (1)
