.TH TR2POST 1
.SH NAME
tr2post \- convert troff intermediate to PostScript
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B tr2post
[
.B options
]
[
.I files ...
]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Tr2post
converts
.I files
(or standard input),
which should be the device-independent output of
.MR troff (1) ,
into the PostScript printer language.
.PP
The options are:
.TP
.BI -a " aspectratio
Set an aspect ratio
.RI ( y / x )
to stretch the PostScript output (default 1.0).
.TP
.BI -c " copies
Set a comment in the PostScript output
marking the number of copies that should be printed.
The comment is intended for ancient versions of the Unix
.IR lp (1)
and is not recognized by any current printer
or print spooler.
.TP
.BI -d
Emit volumes of debugging output on standard error.
.TP
.BI -m " magnification
Magnify the PostScript output (default 1.0).
.TP
.BI -n " formsperpage
Print the PostScript with
.I formsperpage
logical pages per physical page
(default 1).
Using this option emits PostScript with invalid document structuring
comments.
It will print fine but will not view correctly in
.MR gv (1)
or
.I psv
(see
.MR page (1) ).
.TP
.BI -o " pagelist
Print only the pages in the
.IR pagelist ,
which is a comma-separated list of ranges.
Each range is of the form
.I p
(just page
.IR p ),
.IB p - q
(pages
.I p
through
.IR q ),
.BI - p
(pages 1 through
.IR p ),
or
.IB p -
(pages
.I p
through the end of the document).
.TP
.BI -p " " l
Print the document in landscape mode.
An argument that does not begin with
.L l
will print the document in portrait mode.
.TP
.BI -x " xoffset
Translate the page output by
.I xoffset
inches to the right.
(Negative offsets translate to the left.)
.TP
.BI -y " yoffset
Translate the page output by
.I yoffset
inches down.
(Negative offsets translate up.)
.TP
.BI -P " pscode
Emit the text
.I pscode
at the end of the usual PostScript header.
.PD
.SH EXAMPLE
Preview this manual page:
.IP
.EX
troff -man \*9/man/man1/tr2post.1 |
tr2post |
psfonts >/tmp/a.ps
psv /tmp/a.ps
.EE
.SH SOURCE
.B \*9/src/cmd/postscript/tr2post
.SH SEE ALSO
.MR troff (1) ,
.MR psfonts (1)
