.TH TROFF 1
.SH NAME
troff, nroff \- text formatting and typesetting
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B troff
[
.I option ...
]
[
.I file ...
]
.PP
.B nroff
[
.I option ...
]
[
.I file ...
]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Troff
formats text in the named
.I files
for
printing on a typesetter.
.I Nroff
does the same, but produces output suitable
for typewriter-like devices.
.PP
If no
.I file
argument is present, the standard input is read.
An argument consisting of a single minus
.RB ( - )
is taken to be
a file name corresponding to the standard input.
The options are:
.nr xx \w'\fL-m\f2name\ \ '
.TP \n(xxu
.BI -o list
Print pages in the comma-separated
.I list
of numbers and ranges.
A range
.IB N - M
means 
.I N
through
.IR M ;
initial
.BI - M
means up to
.IR M ;
final
.IB N -
means from
.I N
to the end.
.TP
.BI -n N
Number first generated page
.IR N .
.TP
.BI -m name
Process the macro file
.BI /sys/lib/tmac/tmac. name
before the input
.IR files .
.TP
.BI -r aN
Set register
.I a
(one character name) to
.IR N .
.TP
.B -i
Read standard input after the input files are exhausted.
.TP
.B -q
Invoke the simultaneous input-output mode of the
.B rd
request.
.TP
.B -N
Produce output suitable for typewriter-like devices.
.SS Typesetter devices (not \fL-N\fP) only
.TP \n(xxu
.B -a
Send a printable
textual
approximation
of the results to the standard output.
.TP
.BI -T dest
Prepare output for typesetter
.IR dest :
.br
.ns
.RS
.TP \w'\fL-TLatin1\ 'u
.B -Tutf
(The default.) PostScript printers with
preprocessing to handle Unicode
characters encoded in
.SM UTF
.PD0
.TP
.B -Tpost
Regular PostScript printers
.PD0
.TP
.B -T202
Mergenthaler Linotron 202 
.RE
.PD
.TP "\w'\fL-m\f2name 'u"
.BI -F dir
Take font information from directory
.IR dir .
.SS Typewriter (\fL-N\fP) output only
.TP \n(xxu
.BI -s N
Halt prior to every
.I N
pages (default
.IR N =1)
to allow paper loading or changing.
.TP
.BI -T name
Prepare output for specified terminal.
Known
.I names
include
.B utf
for the normal Plan 9
.SM UTF
encoding of the Unicode Standard character set (default),
.B 37
for the
Teletype model 37,
.B lp
(`line-printer')
for any terminal without half-line capability,
.B 450
for the \s-1DASI\s+1-450
(Diablo Hyterm),
and
.B think
(HP ThinkJet).
.TP
.B -e
Produce equally-spaced words in adjusted
lines, using full terminal resolution.
.TP
.B -h
Use output tabs during horizontal spacing
to speed output and reduce output character count.
Tab settings are assumed to be every
8 nominal character widths.
.SH FILES
.TF \*9/troff/term/*
.TP
.B /tmp/trtmp*
temporary file
.TP
.B \*9/tmac/tmac.*
standard macro files
.TP
.B \*9/troff/term/*
terminal driving tables for
.I nroff
.TP
.B \*9/troff/font/*
font width tables for
.I troff
.SH SOURCE
.B \*9/src/cmd/troff
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.MR lpr (1) ,
.MR proof (1) ,
.MR tr2post (1) ,
.IR eqn (1), 
.IR tbl (1), 
.IR pic (1), 
.MR grap (1) ,
.IR doctype (1), 
.MR ms (7) ,
.MR image (7) ,
.MR tex (1) ,
.MR deroff (1)
.br
J. F. Ossanna and B. W. Kernighan,
``Troff User's Manual''
.br
B. W. Kernighan,
``A TROFF Tutorial'',
.I
Unix Research System Programmer's Manual,
Tenth Edition, Volume 2.
