.TH WEB 1
.SH NAME
web, wmail \- handle web page, mail message for plumber
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B web
.I url
\&...
.br
.B wmail
.I address
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Web
opens each of the named
.I urls
in a new web browser window.
Any of the
.I urls
may be relative paths to files in the file system;
they will be translated into
.B file://
URLs before being passed to the web browser.
.PP
.I Web
uses the
web browser's
.B -remote
option command-line option,
which requires an instance of the web browser
to be already running.
The choice of browser is determined by the
.B $BROWSER
environment variable, which should be the name of
the executable for your choice of web browser.
The default is
.BR firefox .
Since the various browsers all use different syntaxes
in their
.B -remote
options, the executable name is inspected to determine
the type of browser.
The supported browsers are Opera, Mozilla Firefox, Mozilla Firebird, and Mozilla.
When possible,
.I web
opens each URL in a new tab rather than a new window.
.PP
When run under Mac OS X,
.B $BROWSER
should be set to
.B camino ,
.B firefox ,
or
.BR safari .
.I Web
uses AppleScript to talk to the browser.
If 
.B $BROWSER
is not set,
.I web
looks for Firefox in
.BR /Applications/Firefox.app
and uses it if found;
otherwise it uses Safari.
.PP
.I Wmail
starts the composition of a new mail message to
.IR address .
.PP
The choice of mailer is determined by the 
.B $MAILER
environment variable.
The supported mailers are:
.TP
.B browser
invoke the mailer via a
.B mailto://
URL passed to
.I web
.PD
.PP
.I Web
and
.I wmail
are invoked as start commands in the
.MR plumber (4) 's
rules for opening web pages and writing mail messages.
.SH FILES
.TP
.B \*9/plumb/basic
plumbing rules using
.I web
and
.I wmail
.SH SOURCE
.B \*9/bin
.SH SEE ALSO
.MR plumber (4)
