.TH YESTERDAY 1
.SH NAME
yesterday \- print file names from the dump
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B yesterday
[
.B -cCd
] [
.B -n
.I daysago
] [
.I \-date
]
.I files ...
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Yesterday
prints the names of the
.I files
from the most recent dump.
Since dumps are done early in the morning,
yesterday's files are really in today's dump.
For example, if today is February 11, 2003,
.IP
.EX
yesterday /home/am3/rsc/.profile
.EE
.PP
prints
.IP
.EX
/dump/am/2003/0211/home/am3/rsc/.profile
.EE
.PP
In fact, the implementation is to select the most recent dump in
the current year, so the dump selected may not be from today.
.PP
By default, 
.I yesterday
prints the names of the dump files corresponding to the named files.
The first set of options changes this behavior.
.TP
.B -c
Copy the dump files over the named files.
.TP
.B -C
Copy the dump files over the named files only when
they differ.
.TP
.B -d
Run 
.B diff
to compare the dump files with the named files.
.PP
The
.I date
option selects other day's dumps, with a format of
1, 2, 4, 6, or 8 digits of the form
.IR d,
.IR dd ,
.IR mmdd ,
.IR yymmdd ,
or
.IR yyyymmdd .
.PP
The
.B -n
option selects the dump
.I daysago
prior to the current day.
.PP
.I Yesterday
does not guarantee that the string it prints represents an existing file.
.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
See what's changed in the last week in your profile:
.IP
.EX
yesterday -d -n 7 ~/.profile
.EE
.PP
Restore your profile from yesterday:
.IP
.EX
yesterday -c ~/.profile
.EE
.SH FILES
.TF /dump
.B /dump
by convention, root of the dump file system
.PD
.SH SOURCE
.B \*9/bin/yesterday
.SH SEE ALSO
.MR diff (1) ,
.MR hist (1) ,
.MR vbackup (8)
.SH BUGS
It's hard to use this command without singing.
