.TH OPENFD 9P
.SH NAME
openfd \- prepare a fid for I/O using a file descriptor
.SH SYNOPSIS
.ta \w'\fLTopenfd 'u
.IR size [4]
.B Topenfd
.IR tag [2]
.IR fid [4]
.IR mode [1]
.br
.IR size [4]
.B Ropenfd
.IR tag [2]
.IR qid [13]
.IR iounit [4]
.IR unixfd [4]
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.I openfd
request behaves like open, except that it prepares and returns
a Unix file descriptor corresponding to the opened fid.
.PP
After a successful
.I open
transaction,
.I fid
is considered by the client to have been clunked
and can be reused.
.PP
In addition to sending a
.B Ropenfd
response, the server also sends an out-of-band control-message
containing a Unix file descriptor (an
.BR SCM_RIGHTS
message; this requires that the 9P transport be a Unix domain socket).
This returned Unix file descriptor is one end of a Unix domain socket;
a proxy process at the other end transfers data between
the socket and the 9P server.
Because it is a socket, errors on reads and writes are discarded.
.PP
.I Openfd
is implemented by
.MR 9pserve 4 .
9P servers that post their services using
.MR 9pserve 4
(or indirectly via
.MR post9pservice 3 )
will never see a
.B Topenfd
message.
.SH ENTRY POINTS
.I Fsopenfd
(see
.MR 9pclient 3 )
generates an
.B openfd
message.
.SH BUGS
The returned
.I unixfd
field nominally refers to the file descriptor that has been sent in
the control-message.  However, the file descriptor in the client
process will not necessarily have the same number as in the server
process, so clients should ignore this field and instead trust the
file descriptor number from the control-message.
.MR 9pclient 3
accomplishes this by having
.B \*9/src/lib9pclient/fs.c
.IR _fsrecv
rewrite the field to the value from the control-message before
returning the R-message.
.PP
There is not a special version string to distinguish between servers
that support
.I openfd
and servers that do not.
